## Subject: [[BIOL]]
## Tags:
#biology #biol1010 #science #spring23 #rna #dna
## Date: 2023-01-12
## Lecture: 1.1 Origins of Life and The RNA World

## Notes:
### Earth First Origins Project Seeks to Replicate the Cradle of Life: https://research.rpi.edu/research-report/earth-first-origins-project-seeks-replicate-cradle-life
- The evolution of planet Earth and the emergence of life during its first half-billion years are inextricably linked, with a series of planetwide transformations.
	- Formation of the ocean, evolution of the atmosphere, and the growth of crust and continents
```ad-question
But how and in what order were the ingredients for life on Earth manufactured and assembled?
```

### Video: Earth is Born
- The age of Earth and the solar system is about 4-5 billion years old. Other planets and meteorites are also this age.
#### The Iron Catastrophe
- Iron and other heavy elements sunk into the center of the core of the Earth through all of the magma to form the core.
	- This formed a huge magnet in our planet.
- While lighter and carbon dense elements floated on the top almost like algae.
	- These elements are the building blocks for life.
#### Earth's Magnetic Field
- Earth's magnetic field protects the planet from solar wind.
- Mars had a similar magnetic field as Earth, but due to its small size the core cooled faster and its magnetic field dissipated, leaving it a barren and empty desert.
##### Video Questions:
> [!question]  Where did all the elements come from including the ones that are known to make up organic life?
> > [!todo] Ancient stars, and exploded supernovas.

> [!question] What was the main element found in a meteor that crashied in British Columbia in 2000?
> >[!todo] Carbon

> [!question]  What was the 'iron catastrophe'? How does this protect life as we know it?
> > [!todo] Earth's surface became so ot elements melted, including iron. Heavy object (iron) sink and light elements (carbon) float. Decay of radioactive elements, and debris from space generated heat and formed a magma ocean 100s of km thick.

> [!question]  Approximately, how old is our solar system and planet? Which pieces of evidence convince you?
> > [!todo] 4.5 billion years. Most meteorites are around this age. "Stellar" material.

## Current Events: Planetary Formation: https://nerdist.com/article/rare-images-of-planets-forming-protoplanetary-disks/
```ad-quote
In total, the astronomers captured 15 images of the inner rims of planet-forming disks--or protoplanetary disks--all of which are light years away.
```
- 

### How Life Started on Earth
- The conditions favorable for life to emerge on Earth and evolve into the forms we see today came about through 6 "stages".
	- Black stage
	- Gray stage
	- Blue stage
	- Red stage
	- White stage
	- Green stage
#### Black Stage
- Earth formed - meteorites, rocks and dust present at the start of our solar system.
- Over time planets collided and rocks started circling the sun.
- Earth was hot molten rock but began to cool and solidify into basaltic rock.
- Earth's solidified surface became molten again after a planetoid called Theia collided with it.
	- This even produced the Moon.
```ad-question
Could life have come from Theia? Other meteorites?
```
#### Gray Stage
- The original meteorites that formed Earth only had 250 minerals.
- Intense heat and pressures in the creation of our planet caused new minerals to form.
- Granite became the foundation of our tectonic plates and continents.
	- Yosemite rocks are granite
- The appearanc of Earth changed from black to gray.
- No life yet
```ad-question
Water may have been delivered to Earth by meteorites and comets, do you think that is the origin of Earth's water?
```
#### Blue Stage
- Water plays a central role in every model for the origin of life,
	- Earth cooled enough for liquid water: First oceans formed
- Water is an important solvent and molecules of all types began floating and interacting with one another.
- **Zircon crystals**, created 4.3 bilion years ago, could only have fored in the presence of liquid water.
- **Stromatolites** dated to 3.5 billion years ago are the older "evidence" of life on Earth.
#### Red Stage
- Heavy atmosphere was rich in nitrogen and corbon dioxide but lacked free oxygen.
- Microbes, like those in stromatolites begin to conduct photosynthesis.
- That led to a dramatic rise in a **gaseous oxygen**.
- The early oceans were filled with dissolved iron, it began to rust (due to oxygen) and sink to the bottom of the sea.
- Two-thirds of the 5000 minerals that now make up our planet were created by the introduction of oxygen.
- Rocks create life, life creates rocks.
```ad-question

```
#### White Stage
- New continents formed and broke apart, which created dramatic extremes in the climate.
	- Earth plunged into a deep freeze.
- Life was nearly wiped out but...
	- Volcanoes caused carbon dioxide level to rise, this kept heat in and helped perpetuate life.
- CO2 rises
#### Green Stage
- The diversity of life on Earth exploded due to oxygenation from microbes.
- Evidence of life co-opting minerals for its own evolutionary advantage.
- Life is created and sculpting our surroundings.
- Life has the power to transform a planet.

## How Did Life Arise?
### Ingredients for the Origin of Life
#### 1. Basic Elements & Basic Organic Compounds
##### Video: Formation of the Elements in Stars
> [!question] Build up of the element iron causes a star to die. What happens when a star dies?
> > [!todo] The dead star explodes , and the energy generated overcomes barriers imposed by the concentration of iron allowing other higher elements to be formed.
##### Building Blocks of Life
1. All elements are forged in the interior of star
2. Many carbon-based molecules...
3. Early oceans were a chemical factory for rich array of organic molecules
> [!question] What are the most common elements in the human body?
> > [!todo] Oxygen
> 
#### 2. Complex Biomolecules Capable of Replication
##### Organic Compounds
- Hydrogen and other elements covalently bond to carbon to form simple organic molecules.
	- Carbon can form four strong covalent bonds, which allows great diveristy of molecular structures.
- These molecules can combine to form more complex molecules, including large **polymers**.
- These **polymers**, along with lipids, are called biological macromolecules.
##### Was RNA the Original Self-Replicating Molecule?
- Ancience viruses use RNA as genetic material, not DNA.
	- Influenza and Hepatitis are examples
- Further evidence lies in diverse role of RNA in all modern cells and discovery of catalytic functions.
- Only RNA can initiate DNA replication.
- RNA regulates gene expression, repairs genes, carries genetic information from DNA to ribosomes.
###### DNA Needed to Make Proteins but Proteins Needed to Make DNA
- Proteins known as enzymes catalyze reactions essential to cell's survival.
- Altman & Cech (1982) discovered RNAs can act as catalysts for chemical reactions. These catalytic RNAs are known as ribozymes.
- Certain ribozymes called RNA replicases were also found to catalyze their own synthesis.
##### RNA World
- All these lines of evidence suggest use of RNA by early life forms for genese and replication preceded proteins and DNA.
- Later more stable and efficient molecules such as DNA and proteins evolved and replaced much of RNA’s functionality.
##### 3. Membrane Enclosure
###### Lipid Bilayer
- Natural bilayers are made of phospholipid bilayer.
- Hydrophobic Tail/Hydrophilic Head
	- Fail to mix with water / mix with water
- When exposed to H2O it forms a two-layered sheet with tails pointing toward the center.
- The cell membranes of all living organism are made of a lipid bilayer, as are membranes surrounding nucleus & other sub-cellular structures.
#### 4. Selection & Evolutionary Change
##### How Do Protocols Evolve?
- Protocells encapsulating higher amount of RNA will outcompete protocells with little or no RNA.
	- They may grow by stealing membrane from other protocells.
- RNA molecules must be replicaated and mutations will generate RNAs.
- Merging with other protocells can bring RNA with other capabilities into the protocell.
##### Protocell Competition
- Replication of RNA molecules within protocells creates an **osmotic gradient**, driving the cell to expand.
- As a protocell expands, membrane stretches and grans fatty acids from membranes of other protocells.
	- The "prey" protocell has lower RNA replication rates, and this a lower osmotic gradient.
##### Formation of Artificial Pre-Cells
- Experiments have shown that polypeptides can form microscopic fluid-filled spheres.
- If certain kinds of lipids are in a solution, selectively permeable membranes will form.
- These **molecular packages** are referred to as either **pre-cells**.
	- Pre-cells are artificially made and can incorporate genetic material, creating a **synthetic cell**.
		- This can be the basis for the construction of **artificial life**.

## Tasks:
- [x] Pre-class assignment (PCA) for Thursday, 1/19 #biology #biol1010 #science #spring23 📅 2023-01-19 ✅ 2023-01-13