#### Whats with the & Symbol on the 4th and 5th Parameters of the find_roots Function Prototype?
- When we call this function we haven't stored anything in the two root variables `float root_1, root_2;`.
```c++
float root_1, root_2;  
bool success = find_roots(my_a,my_b,my_c, root_1,root_2);
```
- The first three parameters to this function are *value* parameters.
	- These are local variables for the function who initial values are copies of the values of the corresponding argument in the function call.
	- The value of `my_a` from the main function is used to initialize `a` in function `find_roots`.
	- Changes to value parameters within the called function do not change the corresponding argument in calling the function.
- The final two parameters are *reference* parameters as indicated by the `&`.
	- Changes to value parameters are aliases for their corresponding arguments. **No new object are created.**
	- As a result, changes to *reference* parameters are changes to the corresponding variables (arguments) in calling the function.
	- By putting the `&` sign you pass the memory location to the function and change the spot.
		- Look at the same copy of the object where any changes made affect the original object
- **Rules of Thumb** for using value and reference parameters:
	- When a function needs to provide one simple result (`check_root`), make that result return the value of the function and pass other parameters by value.
	- When a function needs to provide more than one result (`find_roots`), these results should be returned using multiple reference parameters.