## Subject: [[BIOL]]
## Tags:
#biology #biol1010 #science #genetics #dna #rna 
## Date: 2023-02-13
## Lecture: 2.2 Molecular Biology I

## The Path from Nucleotides to Proteins
### Summary: Pieces of The Path from DNA to Proteins
- 
### What's the Difference between DNA and RNA?
- Same basic components: base, sugar, phosphate.
- DNA is double stranded, RNA is single stranded.
- **Purines**: Adenine & guanine
- **Pyrimidines**: Cytosine, thymine, & uracil
### Although Linear Sequence of Nucleotides Appears Quite Similar, 3-D Conformations Quite Different
- **RNA** can fold into a **variety of shapes**.
- This conformational complexity allows RNA to serve multiple purposes.
- This makes RNA more diverse than DNA.

## Gene Structure in Eukaryotes
### Exons and Introns
- **Exons** are coding regions
	- They are expressed
- **Introns** are non-coding regions
	- They are removed
### Transcription and RNA Processing
- DNA transcribed to a **primary RNA transcript**
- **GTP Cap** is attatched to **5' end**
	- Prevents degradation
- **Poly A tail** at **3' end**
	- Serves as nuclear...

## Let's talk genes: 
### Singular, Multiple, Mutations?
- Most **eukaryotic genes** have intervening sequences of nucleotides within the message that they carry,
	- This makes no sense in terms of reading the information.
- Extracting the meaning requires precision.
- The **transcript** of these genes **must be processed** to extract the correct information.
### Protein-Coding Genes may be solitary or belong to a gene family
- **~25-50% solitary genes** that are represented once in genome.
- 50-75% duplicated genes are close but nonidentical sequences.
- Gene family -> protein family
- ...
### Heavily Used Gene Products are encoded by multiple copies of the gene
- ...

## Cell Division and Distribution of Genetic Material
### The Human Karyotype
- A **karyotype** is the number of chromosomes in the nucleus of a normal eukaryotic cell.
- Humans have **23 pairs of chromosomes**
	- **22 pairs of autosomal & 1 pair of sex chromosomes;**
		- XX (Female)
		- XY (Male)
- Thus the **2N** or **diploid number of chromosomes in humans is 56 & the haploid number is 23**.
- **Polyploids** are species with 2 or more sets of chromosomes. It is **common in plants** & important in plant speciation.
- 

## Tasks:
- [ ] PCA 8📅 2023-02-16 #biol1010 